When I look at the map of subsea cables
going across the Strait of Hormuz, it's
like Saudi Arabia connecting to I guess
Iran.
Can they the global internet by
snapping those cables in particular or
would it just the connectivity
between, you know, the countries that
are sort of clustered around there?
Well, I mean, it would definitely, you
know, impede the countries clustered
around there, but we also have to
remember that the internet doesn't
function
um like a highway in the sense that the
straightest the fastest route between
two points is not necessarily the the
shortest route.
>> Okay.
>> So, for example, if I'm sitting in
London, I'm sort of pinging a server in
let's say Portugal. Um it may well be
that at that particular moment and this
router is making the decision for me,
the shortest route is to France and then
onward to Portugal um by land rather
than through sea throughout.
>> I see.
>> Um it may also be that I live in Saudi
Arabia, but I'm a Gmail user and my
Gmail data is being stored somewhere
else. It's being stored maybe in Western
Europe or it's being stored even in the
US. You don't know which server your
data lives on at all. And so, when you
when you sort of cut a bunch of cables
that service that particular part of the
world, you're also essentially
forcing the rest of the internet to
reroute itself constantly until the
until these cables are fixed.
>> [music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. [music] I'm Tracy
Alloway. And I'm Joe Wiesenthal. Joe, I
am going to send you a link.
>> Okay.
>> You're going to open it on your laptop,
[music] which we have expressly for this
purpose, and tell me what you see. Okay.
>> Okay, I'm putting it
>> is a fun experiment. We've never done
anything like this before.
>> we've never been so prepared for a
podcast as to have a link ready to go.
>> It's a map of undersea ca- It's actually
the Encyclopedia Britannica page of
undersea cables and there's a really
old-fashioned looking map here.
Looks pretty
What does that remind you of?
Uh
Oh, now I lost the line.
Um I knew this wouldn't work.
>> Shipping lanes?
>> Yes. Oh, okay. Good. Good. I got the
right answer. Yeah. Yes, I've been
looking at these maps and they look
remarkably like shipping lanes even
though upon further reading it turns out
that subsea cables do not precisely
follow actual like major shipping lanes,
but since most of them are going to and
from a major economic center, a city, or
something, they look a lot like shipping
lanes. And the reason I bring this up is
because I think with everything
technological nowadays, you know,
whether it's AI or the basic internet,
there's a tendency to think of it as
this very ephemeral digital presence in
our lives, but of course, as we've been
discussing on a couple podcasts
recently, there is an incredible
physical architecture, which is the
source of all these things, whether it's
subsea fiber optic cables that kind of
look like shipping lines, or massive
data centers that cost a lot of
electricity and commodities to produce.
Undersea uh cables is one of the most
fascinating things to me because you
know, like the there's been a cable,
right, between London and New York for
over 100 years. Right? And that blows
That's actually why the UK pound
sterling rate is called cable. That's
why it's nicknamed that. Um it blows my
mind that like over 100 years ago,
whenever it was when they first had the
telegraph, that they were able to string
a continuous line from London to New
York. Like that it blows my mind that
they could do that, whenever that was,
like a century ago, whenever. But it
blows my mind that they can still do it
today. Like it actually it her I still
find it hard to believe that they can
actually have one length of cord that
goes under sea this far. Even with all
the technologies, I still can't wrap my
head around how they do that.
>> Yeah, and some of those cable lines I
think are armored in various ways to
protect them. They're talking about
doing like more land fiber optic cables
now as well. There's a lot that we
should discuss, not just because this
topic is incredibly interesting and
we've been meaning to for a long time,
but also because with all the
geopolitical volatility that we're
seeing nowadays, you always hear subsea
cables coming up as a potential source
of vulnerability. Totally. You hear
about attacks on them from time to time,
and I guess there's probably some
redundancies and other ways to route
around, but it is weird to think that
like in theory
you could just like cut off some part of
the world from the internet by clipping
all the cables. At least I get that
impression.
>> send out little drone lobsters and they
like cut the cables on the deep sea bed
with their little lobster claws.
>> literally happening. Okay, we should
actually speak to someone who knows
about this. Uh we do in fact have the
perfect guest. Again, someone we wanted
to speak to for a very long time. We're
going to be speaking with Samanth
Subramanian. He's the author of The Web
Beneath the Waves, The Fragile Cables
That Connect Our World. He's also the
acting manager editor of Equator, which
is a new magazine covering politics and
culture. Sounds very cool. Samanth,
thank you so much for coming on Odd
Lots.
Thank you for having me. I should have
said in the intro that you're actually
the author of numerous books on kind of
I would say disparate subjects. So I'm
very curious why you decided to cover
something like subsea cables.
Well, I mean there's a long answer and a
short answer. And the long answer has to
do with this um essay that I read
more than 10 years ago. This was an
essay by the science fiction writer Neal
Stephenson.
And he had written this piece in Wired
magazine sometime in the '90s, 40,000
words long. It took up like virtually
the entire magazine called Mother Earth
Motherboard.
And that essay had Stephenson, you know,
he sort of cast himself in the role of
what he calls a hacker tourist.
And he goes around the world kind of
looking at places where these subsea
cables land and are are are are
installed into the earth or are kind of
like let into the sea or repaired and he
meets these like odd people who do do
this kind of work or did this kind of
work back then. And he kind of traces
through all of this a picture of the the
nascent internet. I mean the internet
was already there but I guess it wasn't
sort of as big as it was now obviously
but you know, it wasn't even as big as
it was in 2005, you know, there was a
lot of big data explosions yet to come
but it was clearly something that was
burgeoning and I think Neal Stephenson
did such a good job even in the 1990s of
reminding people that the internet is
sort of reliant on this physical
infrastructure. This actual cabling that
looks remarkably similar to telegraph
cables from the 1800s although of course
there are big differences. So he he
wrote this essay in the 1990s. I read it
in I don't know, 2012 I think and I
remember being so entranced by the story
that I had to step out to get groceries
and I kept reading on my phone, you
know, I read in the shop, I read on the
way back.
Um I was walking to and to and from
there and of course it struck me that
the only reason I was able to load it on
my phone as I was walking was because
the internet was
um carrying this story to me through
some undersea cable or another.
And then fast forward to a few years ago
when there was a big volcanic eruption
off the coast of Tonga which is an
archipelago in the South Pacific.
And Tonga lost connection to its only
international subsea data cable. Uh the
mudslide and landslide that kind of came
out of the volcanic eruption underwater
severed this line and Tonga was sort of
plunged into a kind of internet
darkness.
And that started to make me think, you
know, well, what is it like today for a
country or a society or an economy to
live without the internet for even a
brief period. Um what are these cables
like today? How have they changed from
the time that Neal Stephenson wrote this
essay in the 1990s?
Who lays them now?
Who owns them now? Has the funding
changed?
Do governments play a different role,
similar role?
And I kind of wanted to find all of this
out and I wanted to use Tonga as this
kind of little test case of what it was
like for a country to live without the
internet for a while.
And that's why I pitched the book. You
know, there's that famous phrase from
Ted Stevens, the senator, the internet
is a series of tubes and
>> Yeah. It is though. I never understood
why everyone made fun of the guy. That's
literally what we're talking about. It
is a series of tubes. Okay, maybe
they're like pipes or cables, but like
it never really seemed that wrong.
>> the confusion comes with wireless,
right? Where you're holding your cell
phone and it's like, well, my cell phone
isn't actually attached to anything at
the moment. So, it's hard for people to
wrap their heads around.
Um, I always thought he was unfairly
maligned. Talk to us about the process,
this this sort of the very simple
explanation of how a long undersea cable
is laid and how much is it fundamentally
similar or different to when that first
famous telegraph cable is laid between
New York and London? Well, the cables
themselves are very different. I mean,
the first telegraph cable was made of
copper and you kind of send pulses of
electricity through it and that comes
out of the other end and it's kind of
decoded. The modern fiber optic cable is
a real technological marvel. I mean, I
haven't stopped marveling at it since I
started researching this book. The best
cables or the you know, the ones at the
bottom of the ocean are just a hair
thick, just literally the thickness of a
human hair. They're made of highly
purified glass.
And down that cable you send sort of
little pulses of light, lasers
essentially, and they kind of bounce
around the inner walls of the glass and
they come out of the other end and you
can decode them.
And what they do these days, there's a
long um, name for it called wave
division multiplexing where they send
different frequencies of light encoded
with different streams of data. And so
that kind of bounces around the glass
at various speeds. And then it comes out
of the other end and you kind of whoop,
suck it out and you
code it all back together and you kind
of read the information out that way.
And that has kind of exponentially
increased the amount of data that a
cable can carry. You know, these cables
are produced by just a handful of
companies around the world. So there's a
little bottleneck over there in terms of
technological capacity to produce these
cables. And then there's, you know,
people who find the money for these
cables. So that used to include
state-owned telecom companies, then it
included private investors sort of
raising money from a bunch of places.
Now, as we'll probably talk about, it's
mostly big tech companies, you know,
paying for it out of their own wallets
because they can afford to. Um, and then
they would sort of fund the a survey
ship to go out and see what the best
route for the cable would be from say
London to Lisbon to Cape Town to, I
don't know, the UAE. Um, and then the
survey ship would come back and give you
the best possible route and then the a
cable laying ship would go out, you
know, make multiple trips and just sort
of slowly, very slowly lay the cable
along exactly that route. Um, and you
have to do it that way because too fast
and it might snap, too slow and there's
too much slack in the cable. And so you
really need to kind of find this optimum
speed at which to travel. And it's
really funny, there's one company in the
entire world that makes the kind of
software that all these cable ships use
that determine the ship's path, the
ship's speed, all of this stuff just so
the cable is laid just so. Hm. Just to
be clear, quick question. Is it
basically whether we're talking about
the Victorian era cable or now, is it a
ship with a giant spool basically that
slowly unwinds as it moved?
That's basically it. Yeah. I mean, that
hasn't changed. I mean, there's a couple
of other things that haven't changed
though, but that definitely hasn't
changed. Um they call them a drum or
they call it a spool, but essentially
wind the cable around the spool, and
then you load it on board, and then you
set off into the high seas. So,
uh so that part of it hasn't changed. Of
course, the cable is much lighter now,
so you can load a lot more cable onto it
because it's not sort of thick metal.
Sorry, I realized we kind of skipped
ahead, but for people who um who do like
to malign Senator Stevens on his tubes
comment, why is it that we can't just
send, you know, data all through
cellular means? Why do we need fiber
optic cables at all? Well, you could. I
mean, you know, in fact, recently
um somebody had somebody made sort of
the first uh entirely cellular call
through satellites. I think through a
sat Let me start that again.
You can, definitely. I mean, you can use
satellites, and in fact, satellite
phones have been around for a long
while. You know, Garmin makes all of
these satellite-enabled devices, and you
can download weather data and other
stuff onto it.
It's just that the volume, the sheer
volume of data that we
ingest on a daily basis,
you couldn't fill Earth's orbit with
enough satellites to take all that data
up. I mean, think about what a what it
means. It means everybody's Netflix
streams and everybody's Zoom calls and
everybody's texts and phone calls and
day trades and you know, PowerPoint
presentations that live on the cloud and
data servers that serve other kinds of
things. Everything is essentially on a
cloud somewhere, and there's so much
data out there that, you know, there's
not enough satellites that could that
could process all of it. Okay. That
makes sense. So, the other thing I
really want to ask you is it Who
actually makes these decisions about
what gets laid and where and who's
financing it? And I know you mentioned
that big tech nowadays pays for most of
it, but I imagine that must have changed
throughout time, right? If we're
thinking back to that first
transatlantic cable,
maybe it was wealthy industrialists
trying to do something nice for the
world, I don't know. Um maybe it was
governments pressing forward with it,
more likely it was private companies,
but the role of who's funding and
planning these things must have changed
throughout time.
It definitely has. I mean, in the '80s
and '90s,
if you go back to sort of and I mean I
mean the 1980s and 1990s, you know, a
lot of these telecom companies around
the world were state-owned.
And so they would kind of figure out
that they needed a cable to run from,
let's say,
London to Portugal to three African
countries and [clears throat] then
onwards to Singapore, as an example.
So the telecom companies in each of
these governments would come together
and they would say, "Well, look, this is
how we want to lay the cable. This is
how much money we can put up. In return,
we get this much bandwidth and we can
kind of sell that on to our customers."
And so these companies would form
essentially like a consortium and that
was the consortium model was popular for
a very long time.
And in 1990s and the early 2000s, you
saw this wave of privatization around
the world. All of these telecom
companies were hived off into private
companies.
And suddenly, at the same time, there
was also this growth of the investor-led
model. Like an investor would say, "This
cable looks like a good business idea. I
will go out and raise money
and then I will come back to these
telecom companies and say, 'Look, I'm
willing to lay this cable. How much
bandwidth do you want to buy buy from
me?'"
And they would kind of, you know,
apportion bandwidth in that way. And so
that you that model prevailed for like
much of the 2000s. And I think it's only
about
seven or eight years ago
that big tech companies, by which I mean
Google, Meta, Amazon, and Microsoft, um
A grew so cash-rich that they could
afford these cables. So for example, a
transatlantic cable now from London to
New New York would cost about 500
million dollars, which um
you know, is a lot of money still for
you and me, but maybe not that much for
Google. And so, they started to fund
these cables because, rightly or
wrongly, they thought, "Look, data is
the lifeblood of our business, and it
makes more sense to, uh, to build this
infrastructure ourselves." And so, now
we got to the stage, or, you know, when
I was researching this book, it got to a
stage where
two out of every three new cables were
being funded
and owned, either in part or in full
full, by one of these four tech
companies.
And that has enormous sort of
implications for data privacy, data
security, I mean, sort of who controls
your data, but also, like, who controls
who gets the internet. Yeah. When the
infrastructure of the internet was first
starting to be built out, particularly
in the 1990s, there was a popular
parallel to, um, the railway booms, etc.
And it's sort of similar economics and
connecting locations and all that.
Railway rail is kind of a natural
monopoly, you know, if you want to have
a rail between New York and Chicago, you
don't need five separate tracks owned by
separate companies all right next to
each other. It's sort of wasteful, etc.
>> Wait, let me just say, as a regular
Amtrak commuter, I do wish there were
multiple tracks.
>> there were competition, but there's
never going to be, right? That'll just
never happen. There aren't going to be
four tracks between a random town in
Connecticut and New York.
>> can dream.
>> One can dream.
To what degree do the economics of this
replicate? How much redundancy is there?
How many different cables are there in
some cases along exactly the same route?
To what degree does the monopoly the
natural monopoly effect either replicate
or not? Well, there's a considerable
amount of redundancy built in because I
think
the deal here is this, even if Google
owns, for example, one transatlantic
cable,
um, it is in Google's and even the even
if it let's assume, hypothetically, it
funnels
only Google-based data through that
cable. So, let's assume funnels Gmail
and Google Meets and all this other
stuff. Only Google data is going through
that cable. This is This never happens,
but we'll we'll let it ride for now.
It is in Google's best interests
to um buy redundancy on another cable
because that cable might go down. And in
in a similar way, it is in Meta's best
interest to buy redundancy on a Google
cable just in case a Meta cable goes
down. So, there's a lot of redundancy
built into the system. There's between
500 and 550 undersea cables around the
world. Um many of them
are sort of clustered around these, you
know, not surprisingly these big areas
of economic activity. So, Western Europe
to the Eastern Seaboard of the US, China
and Southeast Asia, you know, sort of
the Gulf and then India. So, these These
are sort of heavily trafficked routes
and there's a lot of cables that traffic
them for the simple reason that
redundancy is important.
We can think about the fact that every
year
roughly 100 cables get cut around the
world. Um most of these are accidents.
You know, there might be a ship that
throws its anchor overboard and cuts a
cable by accident or it might be that a
fishing boat is trawling the seabed and
it hooks a cable and snags it and cuts
it. So, think about 100 cuts every year
and yet we don't experience nearly that
order of internet outages, right? And
part of the reason is of course we have
redundancy in the form of land cables,
which I haven't really talked about in
this book. But, you know, there's cables
coming to the US from Canada and so on.
So, that takes up a share of the
traffic. But, also there's redundancy in
the marine
uh cable ecosystem itself. So, like if
one cable gets cut, there's enough
cables
crossing the Atlantic, for example, to
take up the burden of the the data that
uh that was severed.
Actually, this reminds me the other
thing I want to ask you is how much does
geography play into these decisions?
Because again, going back to that chart,
they very much resemble shipping lanes.
So, getting from point A to point B,
presumably as fast and efficiently as
possible. But also, one thing I learned
in researching for this episode is that
Egypt apparently is a big I don't want
to say choke point, but like a major
center for fiber optic cables in much
the same way that it's a major center
for container shipping through the Suez
Canal. So, how much is geo just pure
basic geography actually inform the
decisions of where these cables get
laid?
Oh, it's a big deal. I mean, first
there's under sea geography, right? I
mean, the topography of the ocean floor
is obviously not flat flat flat. There
are crevasses and gorges and there's
currents that go one way or another.
There's like steep lips of rocky
cliffs. And so, you have to kind of
avoid all of this. You know, Tonga,
which I mentioned earlier, had has the
unfortunate
um
situation of sitting in that Pacific
Ring of Fire. So, there's an underwater
volcano not far away and that's liable
to break its cables and it has in the
past even before the one that I talked
about. So, under sea geology, geography,
big deal. But even sort of, you know,
over sea geography is a massive deal.
So, for example, if you want to come
from Asia to Europe, as with a ship,
it's much cheaper to come through the
Suez Canal rather than to go around um
around South Africa. And uh you know, in
the Neal Stephenson essay I talked
about, he makes a big deal out of this
in a you know, in a sort of really
elegant way. He goes to Alexandria
where a bunch of cables are sort of
crisscrossing over from Asia to Europe
and vice versa. And he talks about how
Alexandria is at that point kind of like
a
a storehouse or a hub of information
very similar to how it was back in the
day when the Library of Alexandria was
still in place. So, there's sort of this
parallel with ancient history.
But
you know, Egypt, you bring up Egypt and
Egypt is a really good example. The
other good example is something that's
very much in the news now, which is the
Strait of Hormuz. Mhm. And just as it's
very convenient for ships to take that
path in, so it is for cables to take
that path in. And And the Red Sea and
the Strait of Hormuz are both um choke
points, as you say again, in which if a
malign actor sort of wanted to really
the global internet, they could
go down there, use your lobster drones
that you talked about, and clip every
single you know, cable that runs through
the ocean floor over there. Um and
people are starting
>> just ask on on that? So, when I look at
the map of subsea cables going across
the Strait of Hormuz, it's like Saudi
Arabia connecting to, I guess, Iran.
Can they the global internet by
snapping those cables in particular, or
would it just the connectivity
between, you know, the countries that
are sort of clustered around there?
Well, I mean, it would definitely
you know, impede the countries clustered
around there. But we also have to
remember that the internet doesn't
function
um like a highway in the sense that the
straightest, the fastest route between
two points is not necessarily the the
shortest route.
>> Okay.
>> So, for example, if I'm sitting in
London
and um I'm sort of pinging a server in,
let's say, Portugal. Um it may well be
that at that particular moment, and this
router is making the decision for me,
the shortest route is to France and then
onward to Portugal um by land rather
than through sea throughout.
>> I see. Okay.
>> Um it may also be that I live in Saudi
Arabia, but I'm a Gmail user, and my
Gmail data is being stored somewhere
else. It's being stored maybe in Western
Europe, or it's being stored even in the
US. You don't know which server your
data lives on at all. And so, when you
when you sort of cut a bunch of cables
that service that particular part of the
world, you're also essentially
forcing the rest of the internet to
reroute itself constantly until the
until these cables are fixed. How does a
cable repair work?
Oh man, it's so old school. I mean, I
was kind of shocked at this. I thought
there would be, you know, underwater,
you know, unmanned underwater vehicles
and so on and so forth. But actually a
lot of it is just exactly how telegraph
lines were fixed
back in the day, which is that you send
a ship out to where you think the cut
is. And obviously now our sense of sort
of where a broken cable might lie is
much, much sharper than it used to be in
the 1800s. But once you get there, you
throw a grappling hook overboard and you
kind of drag it along the seafloor and
you hope that it snags the cable. And
sometimes you, you know, you feel you
it's it's like you you have a bite and
you pull it up and it's caught something
else entirely and you chuck it back into
the ocean and you try again. And so this
is essentially how all ships do repairs
these days. And of course, once you get
the cable on board, it then jumps back
into extremely sophisticated gear. So
there's a lab on board the ship that is
built to splice sort of glass fiber
optic cables together. You know, it's
sort of stabilized in a even in a very
rocky sea it can sort of work with
astounding levels of stability. There's
a clean room. And so you kind of do all
of this stuff and then you carefully lay
it back into the ocean in the exact
coordinates where it used to be. And and
and you test it and you test it again
and again until you make sure that it
works.
So we know that cables can be cut mostly
by accident, but occasionally by bad
actors. But as you mentioned earlier,
there are redundancies built into the
system. What are redundancies that I
guess were
not as attuned to at the moment? Like
what are the weaknesses that we should
be really thinking about?
Well, I mean, one of the weaknesses I,
you know, this is not a weakness from
the internet's point of view, maybe.
Although, you know, some people might
beg to differ. But I think this earlier
point that I raised, which is sort of
the dominance of four essentially
American tech companies in the cable
laying world
is a weakness in one way. It kind of
shrinks the internet
because it the internet then depends on
sort of where these companies want to
lay cables and people rely on them for
who's going to get served by the
internet and who isn't.
There's a there's an example that I cite
in the book about the longest cable
laid anywhere in the world and this is a
cable called 2Africa and it's
funded and owned I think almost entirely
by Meta. And Meta therefore I think like
makes the decisions of well which which
West African countries
should we land in? Now
West African countries and Africa in
general
they're very underserved by the
internet. I mean this is sort of an
internet deficient population and for
any economy today I think the internet
is sort of
it's a prerequisite. You can't sort of
develop and grow without being online as
much as everybody else has in the West.
And so for the government of West Africa
this of of Cote d'Ivoire for example
this presents
a real dilemma. On the one hand do they
welcome Meta in and say you know of
course feel free to land a cable on our
shores but we have these kinds of
conditions that European countries have
you know we want our citizens data to be
stored on servers on our soil.
And this is something that European
countries have been able to demand and
get quite often. Um but unfortunately
the Cote d'Ivoire government has much
less leverage than any Western European
nation and so for example if we were to
tell Meta that it runs the risk of Meta
saying well that's fine maybe we don't
want to land in this country after all
and and loop somewhere else instead. And
so then they're in a real dilemma I mean
do they sort of
look out for the privacy and data
security of their citizens or do they
give their citizens expanded internet
access which is really sort of what
they're they're craving. Um and I think
this is a weakness. I think this
is sort of um
it gives a lie to the old sort of
utopian model of a free, open internet.
Um and as in many other ways, uh which
you know,
we talk about all the time these days, I
think this also actually sort of closes
off the internet in some sense and kind
of suffocates certain people who want to
get online.
Joe, I was trying to think of where um a
really remote place in the world that
might not have um fiber optic cable yet.
And so I looked up Kiribati. And it
turns out there's a cable that's
supposed to have become operational
funded by the US, Australia, and Japan
in 2025. But I can't see anything about
whether it actually did start working.
There you go. There must be some Chinese
company that's competing with Meta and
all these going to the developing world
and African Latin America saying, "Don't
you don't have to trust these big tech
giants. We'll do it. We'll do it
cheaper, etc." That That must exist,
right?
There is exactly one. Well, there's two,
I think. But the main one is called HMN,
um which is a spin-off of Huawei. And
HMN has been in the cable business for a
while now, like I think more than a
decade.
Um and HMN doesn't really own cables
outright. HMN is kind of like um these
two or three big companies, including
SubCom in the US, that lay
uh cables. They kind of go out there and
they lay the cable for a corporate
customer. And so you could easily go to
them and say, "Why don't you lay our
cable instead? It'll be sort of cheaper
than these American companies that do
it." The problem here is that, you know,
as you know, for the last six or seven
years, Chinese tech companies have been
on sanctions lists around the world um
after the first Trump administration put
them there. So, to go out and engage HMN
and to ask Huawei to come and lay a
cable
is just a sort of risk uh
going against that sanctions list and
therefore risk all kinds of punitive
measures being enforced against you.
There used to be a time that, you know,
the idyllic days about eight or nine
years ago when Western companies and
Chinese companies would sort of come
together in consortiums and lay cables
jointly, you know, they would kind of
bear part of the burden and they would
figure out who is going to do the actual
laying and how much bandwidth people
would get. Um
two or three of these projects
have actually been frozen.
They, in one case, the cable has
actually been laid, but nobody can
switch it on because the US government
doesn't want that to happen because a
Chinese company is involved. In two
other companies, I think the, you know,
the mapping was in two other cases, I
think the mapping was done, the funds
were committed, and then they had to
kind of pull everything back.
Um there hasn't been a new cable laid
between China and the US direct in
years, in years. Um even though traffic
between these two countries has never
been greater. Uh
so, you have to route everything now
through the Philippines or through
Singapore, you know, there's like a
very, very long way around to go from
Chinese East Coast to the West Coast of
the West Coast of the US. So, this is
none of this is, of course, efficient in
any way or desirable in any way. Um but
even more than that, I think people in
the industry start to worry
that
something like a kind of bifurcation of
the internet is going to start setting
in. By which I mean that if there's a
particular part of the world that needs
cabling and the Americans want to cable
it but don't want Chinese involvement
and the Chinese want to cable it as
well, there will essentially be two
parallel cable systems running in that
part of the world. Now, this isn't
parallel in the sense of redundancy,
this is parallel in the sense of
superfluity. You know, you don't need
both of them and yet you have both of
them and so what happens to the internet
there? Does it get fractured and split
along these two cable systems? What then
happens to the promise of the internet,
which as we said, was conceived as a
free and open access kind of system to
link the world? Um and so I think there
are people in the industry who talked to
me who talked to me quite a bit about
their anxieties for just how the
internet might be bifurcated in this
way. It came up that most of the damage
that happens to undersea cables is
probably accident, fishermen, whatever.
But is there a measurable increase in
intentional sabotage of cables that
we've seen? I mean, people within the
industry seem to think so.
Um and I think governments seem to think
so as well. And so,
um we've seen
an amping up by many degrees
um of the kinds of protective measures
that governments and companies
um accord to these cables. So, the UK,
where I live right now, a few years ago
they announced that they would have two
military naval vessel vessels
permanently on patrol around the island
to protect not just undersea data
cables, but also power cables and oil
and gas pipelines.
Um
the Baltic nations and the Scandinavian
nations have their coast guard coast
guard patrols on higher alert than ever
before because they think Russian ships
are out there to cut these cables in
acts of what is known as gray zone
warfare.
Um the Taiwanese government is paranoid
that China will eventually, you know, in
some kind of act of war
cut every single one of the 15 internet
cables coming from overseas that land on
Taiwanese shores.
Um so I think there's like a a real
anxiety surrounding this particular act
of malicious damage. And, you know, this
of course goes along with the fact that
there's plenty of other anxiety about
geopolitical conflict in this day and
age. But I think
countries and governments are acutely
aware that this is one extremely
effective way of crippling economies
um that a malicious actor could sort of
undertake at virtually no or little
expense. So, I'm looking at a headline
right now that says Saudi Arabia, Qatar,
and the UAE are financing competing data
corridors through Syria, Iraq, and East
Africa to try to bypass the Strait of
Hormuz um to avoid the problems we've
been talking about. Like, what are the
the things that governments or private
companies can actually do if they're
worried about bad actors out there who
might be attacking this vital
infrastructure?
Well, one thing to do is to um build out
more redundancy. And I don't mean sort
of just lay more cables. Um if you look
at sort of the map of the telegraph
cables of the late 1800s, and you look
at the current map of um undersea
cables, you see that they're kind of
similar. I mean, they're almost the same
except for this big new thicket of
undersea data cables that has come up in
East Asia and Southeast Asia. And part
of the reason for that is out of habit
or inertia or reasons of
cost-efficiency,
uh cables still land in pretty much the
same places that they did
100 years ago. So, I'm from India, for
example, and many, if not all, of the
undersea data cables that land in India
today land in Mumbai on the west coast
or Chennai on the east coast. And that's
exactly where the telegraph cables used
to land a century ago. Um and you know,
I asked many people as to why this is,
and you know, it's just easier. You
know, you have the data centers there
already. Um there's economies of scale.
So, all you have to do is just get an
extra cable on there, and you have the
rest of the infrastructure ready to go.
But maybe a solution lies in sort of
finding other places to land, other
places in which um you know, this data
infrastructure can be protected. That's
one option. The other option is exactly
what you said right now, which which is
to find sort of alternate routes. But
this is not easy, either. I mean, the
reason, for example, that all these
years cable companies continued laying
through the Strait of Hormuz and didn't
go through Syria is because Syria that a
hotbed for conflict. I mean, it's very
difficult to imagine laying a cable
through Syria circa eight years ago or
nine years ago or laying a cable through
Iraq circa 25 years ago
or indeed 30 years ago. These were
places where geopolitical sort of
turbulence made it very difficult to
ensure the security of the cable.
But yet, you know, as we as we see now
in the headline you read out, people are
being forced to reconsider these other
routes, which I think is a good thing as
well. You mentioned that it's just not
plausible right now to replace all of
this infrastructure with basically
satellite internet. The capacity doesn't
exist for all kinds of reasons.
Are there, you know, the Elon I was
going to say the Elon Musks of the
world, but there's actually one Elon
Musk, but you know, that he's sort of in
a category of his own in many respects.
But like is there a vision are there
people talking about the prospect that
one day the entire internet could truly
be wireless? I mean, you know, they find
ways 5G, they find ways to optimize
wireless connectivity that are
significantly better than they were five
years ago, certainly 20 years ago, etc.
Is anyone talking about a future a post
cable future?
No, I don't think anybody is. And the
reason for that is however much
satellites have improved and they have a
lot. You know, so for example
in the 16 months in which they didn't
have
cable internet,
you know, one of these outlying islands
of Tonga just relied on Starlink
throughout. And that was very useful.
But the problem here is that however
much satellites improve
our appetite our sheer thirst for data
is just going to improve exponentially.
>> Yeah.
And you know, we're seeing that now with
with the AI boom and you know, the fact
that all of this training data is also
sitting on servers in one place and
we're calling it up on cloud and chat
GPT and other kind of engines on our
laptop. And so this is a new kind of
use for data and a new kind of data flow
that wouldn't have existed 5 years ago.
So, we've clearly already seen this
explosion of additional data burdens on
the on the cabling industry. And so, I
think
realistically speaking, nobody thinks
that um we can please replace all our
data infrastructure with satellites. I
think cables are here for a good long
while yet. This was going to be my next
question, actually. So, your book came
out, I think, just in October of last
year. So, still relatively new.
How does the rise of AI, the
hyperscalers, the data centers actually
change the trajectory of the subsea
cable world? I don't think it changes
the trajectory so much as just kind of
accelerates it. I mean, you know, there
was already, as I mentioned earlier,
some of these big tech companies that
were laying cables of their own. Um all
those big tech companies are now engaged
in their own kind of AI um efforts and
often very big uh large-scale ones of
that. And so, I think like the need for
these cables uh and the need to lay more
cables and at a faster clip is only
going to increase because I think you're
going to have more AI training data
centers out there. You're going to have
more flows of data. And so, people were
kind of worried uh for a little while,
maybe about 5 or 6 years ago, people
were talking about the fact that maybe
there was a glut of cables out there
right now. And then maybe we didn't need
to lay any more new cables for the
foreseeable future because we were kind
of set. Um but but the AI boom has
changed all that. It is also true that
you know, the cabling industry follows a
similar um trajectory to the to the
world economy. When there's a recession,
it goes down. People stop laying cables
because it's very expensive to um
to finance as a project. Um after the
dot-com boom, for example, in um early
2000 and then the dot-com bust, there
was a there was a period of stasis that
lasted for almost like 5 years. Um There
was all this extra cabling that had been
ordered up, but nobody was laying it
because it was just too expensive. So, I
think part of it is cyclical and it will
follow
the trajectory of the economy itself.
But I think as far as the AI revolution
or the AI boom goes, as long as that
persists,
I think we'll still need to see more and
more cables being laid just to be able
just to make this entire project
possible. You know, one last question I
have. So, one of the reasons why
cable, going back to the old days,
exists is for finance specifically and
having information about trading in one
place and other roughly the same time
making markets more efficient. Another
thing is
you know, corporations, they don't use
the public internet for a lot of their
communications. They use private
internets which are faster and more
secure and safer. Are there examples of
like, I don't know, JP Morgan, they have
offices in London and they have offices
in New York wanting to have purely
dedicated cables that is not the public
internet, but is essentially a very
large-scale expansion of their private
internets?
No, I don't think that exists yet. I
mean, there there have been instances in
the past, I think, of like financiers
deciding that they want to lay their own
overland cables.
I can't remember which book it was. I
think maybe it was Rocket Boys, but it
was a Michael Lewis book that about
Flash Boys.
>> yeah. Flash Boys, yeah. Flash Boys,
that's right. That opens with the laying
of a cable overland, not oversea, not
undersea, but you know, that that does
exist. But I think the only sort of big
entities that decide that they need
their own cables and they're going to
lay them and exclude everybody else from
them are the big militaries of the
world. So, the US military has its own
cables, the Chinese military has its own
cables, they have their own contractors
for that. And none of the public
internet travels down them whatsoever.
What's your favorite subsea cable?
Oh man, there's a really short one that
almost shouldn't exist because it's so
short, but I feel like you know, it it's
it's so cute because it does exist. It's
I don't know, maybe 14 miles long. I'm
looking this up in my book now.
And it goes between
the Isle of Man and Northern Ireland.
It's 41 miles. So it's not super short,
but it just feels like it's one of those
cables that
that was laid only because
it demonstrated just how cost-efficient
these technologies were.
All right, Sam Subramanian, we're going
to have to leave it there, but thank you
so much for coming on All Thoughts. That
was super interesting. Thank you so
much. This was a lot of fun.
So Joe, that was fascinating. There's a
lot to kind of pick over in that
discussion. I'm very interested in how
we I mean, it's sort of a parallel of
the global economy, isn't it? Where you
used to have consortiums who would work
together to build these things and now
it's just sort of, you know, one of four
very large tech companies that are doing
most of it. The other thing that I was
thinking about is just I didn't realize
the military's had their own cables, but
again, makes a lot of sense. Yeah, no, I
love that topic. Like I said, I still
think it's like one of like the great
marvels. Like I thought, you know, it's
like this is a lot of marvel.
>> Yeah, except we can't actually marvel at
it cuz it's underneath miles and miles
of the ocean. Well, I've You can't go
and look at it. That's the problem. I've
pulled up the BBC website, for example,
and so I kind of can appreciate
>> at that map. The No, no, I mean I'm
literally I've been to websites from
other countries, so I can sort of marvel
at the speed with which they get to me.
It really just blows my mind. The other
thing that's just sort of from a
technical standpoint not a economic or
geopolitical standpoint, the fact that
like you can send a beam of light
through a thing and it bounces around
this tube and then it winds up in
exactly a configuration that can re be
re recombinated in exactly where it
started. That never ceases to blow my
mind, that fact. Well, the other thing I
was thinking about was, you know,
Samanth mentioned that there was a
period where no new subsea cable was
being laid.
>> Yeah.
Partially because it was a recession and
people don't want to spend a lot of
money, but also because it feel it it
reminded me a lot of electricity in the
power industry where like the loads
needed by the population start to
flatline and so we don't really invest
in it for a while and then suddenly
there's a technological advance like AI
and suddenly we need to we're all
thinking about our electricity needs
going up. Feels very much like that.
>> This is the thing about the dot com era
which is that like in 2002
it was like, oh, we're never going to
use all this cable. And then by like
three years later they're like building
it again. But like and to make, you
know, the dot com era looks much less
crazy in retrospect because they were
all completely correct about how big the
internet was going to be and how much
demand there was just it ended up just
being a slight timing mismatch more than
anything else. Technology can be under
hyped and over valued at a single point
in time. That's That's what I keep
saying. All right, shall we leave it
there? Let's leave it there. Okay, this
has been another episode of the Odd Lots
podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway. You can
follow me at Tracy Alloway. And I'm Joe
Weisenthal. You can follow me at The
Stalwart. Follow our guest Samanth
Subramanian. He's at Samanth_S.
Follow our producer Carmen Rodriguez at
Carmen Arman Dash at Dash Bot
and Kel Brooks at Kel Brooks. And if you
want more Odd Lots content, you should
check out our daily newsletter. You can
find that at bloomberg.com/oddlots.
And you can chat about all these topics
24/7 in our Discord discord.gg/oddlots.
And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please leave a comment or like the
video or better yet, subscribe. Thanks
for watching.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Mhm.